---
abstract: |
  [ The process of capturing what makes a creditor trustworthy or not is
  especially vital within the confines of bank data, due to the
  guidelines and ethics of what makes this data usable. Although the
  quantity of the data is massive, there are only a few available
  features that are explicitly useful in the confines of machine
  learning, which calls into question how we should measure customer's
  trustworthiness towards their creditors. Our methodology details the
  process of refining bank data into categories using Natural Language
  Processing, assessing individual's income based on bank data alone,
  and also measuring their credit worthiness both accurately and
  efficiently. ]{style="color: black"}
author:
- |
  Jevan Chahal\
  `j2chahal@ucsd.edu`\
  Hillary Change\
  `hic001@ucsd.edu`\
  Kurumi Kaneko\
  `kskaneko@ucsd.edu`\
  Kevin Wong\
  `kew024@ucsd.edu`\
  Brian Duke\
  `brian.duke@prismdata.com`\
  Kyle Nero\
  `kyle.nero@prismdata.com`\
bibliography:
- reference.bib
title: DSC Capstone Q2 Report
---

::: center
Code: <https://github.com/hillarychang/dsc180b-capstone-q2>
:::

# Introduction

Access to credit is crucial for financial stability, yet traditional
credit scoring models often exclude individuals with limited credit
history. The \"Cash Score\" project aims to address this issue by
utilizing transaction data to evaluate financial behaviors rather than
just historical credit data. Our goal is to provide a more equitable
scoring system that benefits both consumers and financial institutions.

## Data Description

We utilized multiple datasets that provide consumer transaction details,
account balances, and delinquency indicators:

-   **q2-ucsd-consDF.pqt**: Contains consumer attributes like
    `consumer_id`, `credit_score`, and `DQ_target` (delinquency
    indicator).

-   **q2-ucsd-acctDF.pqt**: Includes account-level data such as
    `consumer_id`, `account_id`, `balance_date`, and `balance`.

-   **q2-ucsd-trxnDF.pqt**: Captures transactional details including
    `category`, `amount`, `credit_or_debit`, and `posted_date`.

-   **categories.csv**: Maps transaction categories like Rent,
    Groceries, and Entertainment.

![First few columns of the consumer dataset, including consumer ID,
evaluation date, credit score, and delinquency
target.](figure/consumer_df.jpeg){#fig:consumer_df width="\\textwidth"}

![First few columns of the transactions dataset, showing transaction
IDs, categories, amounts, and whether they were credit or
debit.](figure/transactions_df.jpeg){#fig:transactions_df
width="\\textwidth"}

![First few columns of the transaction categories dataset, mapping
category IDs to their corresponding
descriptions.](figure/categories_df.png){#fig:categories_df width="70%"}

![First few columns of the accounts dataset, including account IDs,
account types, balance dates, and
balances.](figure/accounts_df.jpeg){#fig:accounts_df
width="\\textwidth"}

![Dataframe showing all user transactions along with their account
balances. Credit transactions (inflows) are added while debit
transactions (outflows) are
subtracted.](figure/final_transaction_balance.png){#fig:final_transaction_balance
width="\\textwidth"}

# Methodology

## Exploratory Data Analysis

-   Identified differences in transaction patterns between delinquent
    and non-delinquent consumers.

-   Examined seasonal trends, payday effects, and spending fluctuations.

-   Estimated income using reoccuring transactions

-   Analyzed the impact of account fees, buy-now-pay-later (BNPL)
    transactions, and overdrafts.

## Balance Trends for Delinquent vs. Non-Delinquent Consumers

![Balance trends over time for five randomly selected delinquent
consumers. The plot illustrates fluctuations and frequent occurrences of
negative balances, highlighting financial
instability.](figure/balance_delinquent.png){#fig:balance_delinquent
width="70%"}

![Balance trends over time for five randomly selected non-delinquent
consumers. Compared to delinquent consumers, these users maintain more
stable balances with fewer instances of
overdrafts.](figure/balance_non_delinquent.png){#fig:balance_non_delinquent
width="70%"}

![Balance over time for a single non-delinquent consumer. The balance
exhibits periodic fluctuations, potentially due to income deposits and
spending patterns, but remains above zero during the observed
period.](figure/balance_single_non_delinquent.png){#fig:balance_single_non_delinquent
width="70%"}

![Balance over time for a single delinquent consumer. This consumer
frequently experiences negative balances, indicating financial distress
and an increased risk of missing
payments.](figure/balance_single_delinquent.png){#fig:balance_single_delinquent
width="70%"}

## Feature Engineering

We engineered multiple features relevant to the prediction of
delinquency:

-   **Balance Features**: Negative balance ratio, balance trends, payday
    effects.

-   **Transaction-Based Features**: Credit vs. debit transaction volume,
    category-based spending breakdown.

-   **Temporal Features**: Spending frequency over time, account for
    longevity effects.

-   **Account Types**: Features based on the types of accounts a
    consumer has

![Spending balance ratio feature created to measure how much consumers
spend relative to their balance. This helps assess financial stability
and risk of
delinquency.](figure/spending_balance_ratio.png){#fig:spending_balance_ratio
width="\\textwidth"}

![Feature engineering step where credit and balance were standardized to
allow for easier model interpretability and comparisons across different
financial
profiles.](figure/standardized_credit_balance.png){#fig:standardized_credit_balance
width="\\textwidth"}

## Model Training

We trained the following machine learning models:

-   **Logistic Regression**: Simple, interpretable baseline model.

-   **Random Forest**: Captures non-linear financial relationships.

-   **XGBoost**: Optimized for structured financial data.

-   **Neural Networks**: Captures complex spending patterns.

-   **LightGBM**: Efficient with categorical features and handling
    imbalanced data.

-   **Balanced RF**: Handles class imbalance by weighting classes or
    resampling.

-   **CatBoost**: Handles categorical features automatically, robust to
    overfitting.

-   **HistGB**: A histogram-based gradient boosting model

-   **RUSBoost**: Combines Random Under-Sampling with boosting to
    address class imbalance while maintaining predictive performance.

## Model Evaluation

Key metrics for model evaluation include:

-   **Accuracy and F1-Score**: Measures classification performance.

-   **ROC-AUC**: Evaluates the model's ability to differentiate
    delinquent users.

-   **Precision and Recall**: Precision measures correct positives;
    recall measures detected positives.

-   **Training Time**: Time required to train the model.

-   **Prediction Time**: Time taken to make predictions.

-   **Feature Importance**: Highlights predictive variables.

To mitigate the class imbalance (delinquents only Â 8.4% of dataset), we
used:

-   **SMOTE & SMOTEENN**: Oversampling techniques.

-   **Feature Normalization**: Standardization of key variables.

# Results

## Feature Performance

To identify key predictors of delinquency, we utilized models like
XGBClassifier, which highlighted several influential financial
indicators. Table [1](#tab:top_features_xgb){reference-type="ref"
reference="tab:top_features_xgb"} presents the most important features
based on their contribution to the model.\
\
**The top predictors include**:\

-   **Account Type - Savings**: If a consumer has a savings account

-   **Account fees**: Sum of all account fees

-   **Credit Score**: Credit score of a consumer

-   **Overdraft Median**: Median amount of Overdraft

-   **Account fees**: Median amount of Account fees

-   **BNPL Std**: Standard Deviation of BNPL transactions

-   **Overdraft count**: Number of overdraft transactions

-   **Investment Income Median**: Median amount of Investment income

-   **Investment Income Count**: Number of Investment income
    transactions

-   **Banking Catch All Std**: Standard deviation of a consumer's
    transactions within this category

::: {#tab:top_features_xgb}
  Feature                     Importance   Correlation
  -------------------------- ------------ -------------
  account_types_savings        0.044091     -0.099071
  account_fees_count           0.037083     0.020680
  credit_score                 0.030284     -0.249976
  overdraft_median             0.026024     0.000407
  account_fees_median          0.021387     0.001497
  BNPL_std                     0.021323     0.034083
  overdraft_count              0.021319     0.066101
  investment_income_median     0.018767     0.004675
  investment_income_count      0.017630     -0.026354
  banking_catch_all_std        0.014733     -0.010585

  : Top Features of XGBClassifier
:::

The credit score has the strongest negative correlation with delinquency
(-0.25), reaffirming its importance in assessing financial risk.
Overdraft-related features and account fees also exhibit relatively
strong relationships with delinquency, as consumers with high overdraft
usage and excessive fees are more likely to struggle with repayments.

## Model Performance

  Model                    ROC-AUC        Accuracy      Precision        Recall        F1-Score       
  --------------------- -------------- -------------- -------------- -------------- -------------- -- --
  HistGB                 **0.842428**     0.913528       0.889776       0.913528       0.899533       
  XGBoost                  0.839279       0.910069       0.889033       0.910069       0.898105       
  LightGBM                 0.828857       0.913912       0.889361       0.913912       0.899373       
  CatBoost                 0.823153       0.915834       0.887905       0.915834       0.898882       
  RUSBoost                 0.805893       0.826287       0.905010       0.826287       0.857906       
  Random Forest            0.794283       0.915450       0.885290       0.915450       0.897285       
  Balanced RF              0.791598     **0.919677**     0.892594     **0.919677**   **0.902200**     
  Logistic Regression      0.761125       0.759416     **0.906664**     0.759416       0.814041       

  : Comparison of model performance

-   HistGB achieved the highest ROC-AUC score (0.8424), indicating the
    best overall ability to distinguish between classes.

-   Balanced RF attained the highest accuracy (0.9197), recall (0.9197),
    and F1-score (0.9022). This suggests that the model effectively
    classifies both delinquent and non-delinquent cases, particularly
    excelling in identifying delinquent cases

![Comparison of all AUC_ROC scores of the different models we trained,
further demonstrating the relative strengths of each
approach](figure/auc_roc_all_models.png){#fig:auc_roc_all
width="\\textwidth"}

Apart from standard classification metrics, training and prediction time
are crucial considerations. Table
[2](#tab:time_performance){reference-type="ref"
reference="tab:time_performance"} compares the models based on:

-   **Training Time**: The time required to train the model.

-   **Prediction Time**: The time taken for the model to make a single
    prediction.

::: {#tab:time_performance}
  Model                  Training-Time   Prediction-Time
  --------------------- --------------- -----------------
  HistGB                   8.755626         0.000015
  XGBoost                  5.682351         0.000009
  LightGBM                 4.397599         0.000012
  CatBoost                 42.606373        0.000009
  RUSBoost                 23.319771        0.000042
  Random Forest            22.369477        0.000036
  Balanced RF              27.226752        0.000035
  Logistic Regression    **2.352007**     **0.000008**

  : Comparison of time-based model performance
:::

## Interpretability & Reason Codes

**Top reason codes contributing to a high delinquency risk score:**

-   **Frequent Negative Balances**: A high negative balance ratio and
    frequent occurrences of negative balances per day were strong
    predictors of delinquency.

-   **Overdraft Usage**: The total number and magnitude of overdraft
    transactions contributed highly to delinquency risk.

-   **Buy-Now-Pay-Later (BNPL) Transactions**: Consumers with excessive
    BNPL spending, specifically those with a high standard deviation in
    BNPL transactions, displayed greater financial risk.

-   **High Account Fees**: Frequent account fees, including overdraft
    penalties and maintenance charges, were associated to a higher
    likelihood of delinquency.

-   **Spending in High-Risk Categories**: High expenditures in
    categories such as payday loans, fast cash lending, and gambling
    suggested increased financial instability.

-   **Unstable or Low Income Deposits**: Consumers with volatile
    paycheck deposits or irregular income streams exhibited increased
    delinquency risk.

-   **Late Payment History**: Features related to recurring payments and
    whether they were missed or delayed indicated high delinquency.

# Conclusion

## Key Findings

Through feature engineering and model evaluation, we identified several
key findings relating to delinquency prediction:

-   **Balance Trends Matter**: Consumers with frequent negative balances
    or high overdraft usage are significantly more likely to default.

-   **Spending Patterns are Predictive**: Categories such as Buy Now Pay
    Later (BNPL), account fees, and high-risk financial services are
    disproportionately represented among delinquent consumers.

-   **Income Stability is Crucial**: Variability in paycheck deposits
    and reliance on short-term lending options are strong indicators of
    delinquency.

From a modeling perspective, we evaluated multiple approaches, with
HistGB and Balanced RF emerging as the top performers. HistGB achieved
the highest ROC-AUC score (0.8424), while Balanced RF demonstrated the
best overall recall and precision, making it a solid model as well.

## Next Steps: Developing the Cash Score

Our next steps will be on implementing a Cash Score, a scoring system
based on transactional data. We will focus on enhancing reason codes to
provide clearer insights into the factors contributing to delinquency
risk. We will also work on finalizing our model predictions, ensuring
that they align with both accuracy and fairness in assessing credit
risk. Additionally, we will prepare stakeholder presentations to
communicate our findings, methodology, and the potential impact of
integrating the Cash Score into existing risk assessment frameworks.

# Literature Review

## Attention is All You Need (2017)

One of the key papers in machine learning, *"Attention is All You Need"*
by Vaswani et al. (2017), introduced the Transformer architecture along
with a cohort of innovative ideas for natural language processing,
becoming the foundation for modern-day language models. Specifically,
the architecture addressed limitations of traditional sequence models
and outdated bigram models by introducing an attention mechanism that
does not rely on recurrence or convolution operations, instead focusing
on weights that allow models to weigh the importance of different parts
of the input sequence during processing.

This key innovation enabled Transformer models to capture long-range
dependencies more effectively and efficiently compared to prior models
such as RNNs and LSTMs. Additionally, Vaswani et al. demonstrated that
Transformer models could achieve faster parallelism, requiring less
training time.

For our application in banking transaction categorization and credit
default prediction, Transformer models are particularly relevant. They
offer a promising approach for future banking categorization methods due
to their strong capability in self-attention, which allows precise
categorization of transaction memos. This specificity enhances the
richness of the data available for analysis. Furthermore, the
Transformer model's ability to learn patterns in spending behavior and
recognize relationships between transactions over time offers potential
in detecting financial distress or increased credit risk, as it learns
from sequential transaction data associated with individual consumers.

## Language Models are Unsupervised Multitask Learners (2019)

The paper *"Language Models are Unsupervised Multitask Learners"* by
Radford et al. (2019) marks a shift in natural language processing by
introducing GPT-2, a model that emphasizes unsupervised multitask
learning. Traditionally, NLP models rely on supervised learning, where
they are trained on labeled data. In contrast, GPT-2 was trained on a
massive dataset without any task-specific labels, allowing it to perform
multiple tasks in a *zero-shot setting*, meaning it can handle tasks
without additional data or fine-tuning for each one.

GPT-2's ability to generalize across a range of tasks is primarily
attributed to its use of the Transformer architecture, which employs a
self-attention mechanism to capture long-range dependencies in text more
effectively than previous models such as RNNs or LSTMs. The
Transformer's design also supports parallel processing, making it both
faster to train and more efficient in application. For training, the
authors created WebText, a massive dataset comprising data from Reddit
web pages.

GPT-2's zero-shot learning capability makes it highly adaptable for
categorizing transaction memos without requiring labeled data for each
specific task. By identifying patterns in transactions, GPT-2 could
potentially discover trends across transaction types as well. However,
despite these strengths, GPT-2 has limitations, especially in complex
reasoning, which suggests room for further refinement and improvement.

## DGHNL: A new deep genetic hierarchical network of learners for prediction of credit scoring (2020)

In financial risk management, accurate credit scoring and transaction
categorization models play a crucial role in understanding borrower
behavior and assessing creditworthiness. Traditional models like
logistic regression offer simplicity but often fail to capture the
complex, nonlinear patterns found in financial data. More advanced
machine learning techniques, such as neural networks and ensemble
methods, have demonstrated improved predictive accuracy by modeling
these complexities. However, these approaches can be challenging to
interpret, an essential factor for regulatory requirements in financial
applications. The Deep Genetic Hierarchical Network of Learners (DGHNL)
offers a solution by using a combination of genetic algorithms (GAs) and
hierarchical neural networks to optimize feature selection and learning
in a structured, layered way. This hybrid approach is relevant to both
credit scoring and transaction categorization models, as it can capture
intricate patterns in bank transaction data---vital for understanding
spending behaviors and identifying risky patterns. By categorizing
transactions more accurately, DGHNL could support better credit
assessments by providing a clearer view of a borrower's financial
habits. DGHNL's hierarchical architecture allows the model to focus on
various data levels, potentially making it highly suitable for
categorizing diverse transaction types. This structured learning enables
DGHNL to balance detailed data analysis with high-level abstractions,
enhancing both accuracy and interpretability. Consequently, the model
not only improves risk predictions but also supports nuanced transaction
categorization, helping to bridge gaps in credit scoring and financial
behavior analysis.

[@plawiak2020dghnl] [@radford2019gpt2] [@vaswani2023attention]

# Appendix

::: center
**Project Proposal**:\
<https://drive.google.com/file/d/1G-DzwBNvGlgd32JJwjMDrFrnr5IMGV8t/view?usp=sharing>
:::

# Contributions

-   **Hillary**: EDA, creating & testing features, report, website

-   **Kevin**: EDA, creating & testing features, creating graphs, wrote
    the main code that tests all of our features

-   **Kurumi**: EDA, creating & testing features, creating graphs,
    report

-   **Jevan**: EDA, creating & testing features

Everyone has met all deadlines and contributed equally.
